---
title: 'How do modern day visualization tools compare to Microsoft Excel?'
permalink: /data-musings/excel/
excerpt: 'Data tools that provide visualization enable businesses to generate visuals that go beyond the standard data presentation and offer a “spark” of excitement when highlighting data trends and results'
tags:
  - excel
  - data viz
---

How do modern day visualization tools compare to Microsoft Excel?
------
Data tools that provide visualization enable businesses to generate visuals that go beyond the standard data presentation and offer a “spark” of excitement when highlighting data trends and results. These trends help to identify trends that can be traced to either causation of problems, or deliver a solution to issues a company is currently facing. These visualizations help to turn data from simply a spreadsheet of numbers into insights that can be held, 	and applied to real world business problems offering a competitive advantage. One example of insights gained from visualizations is using Google Analytics as a dashboard for e-commerce. For an e-commerce team, it is very important to understand the breakdown of how the customers are visiting the site, be it on their desktop (Windows Vs. Mac) or on their mobile device (Android vs. iOS). These raw numbers are certainly available, but what is more impactful is seeing the usage rates as compared to total site visitation through graphs and charts. These images and analytics are powerful during defect triage meetings when a specific bug is only impacting end users who are viewing the page on IE 10 browsers from Germany.  Upper management sees this bug they often would declare the issue “high priority” and say it needs immediate attention. However, using data visualization the team is able to quickly highlight that the .5% of our customers using this browser combination is very minor compared to the 85% of our users (and a significantly higher conversion rate) for Window Chrome. Using the visualization of customer browser usage makes my bug prioritization with upper management streamlined. This in turn allows for clear decisions to be made and increases the efficiency work on the development team by tackling problems that will deliver the most value to the company.


Powerful data visualization tools offer a way to integrate several datasets into one comprehensive dashboard and story. In Tableau, this was incredibly important while conducting research for my visualization project. I had several data sources that were all from the ERS, but wanted to display how trends played off of each other. Through smart “joins” within the data tool I was able to easily import the data and combine them into one visualization. Additionally, in the realm of big data the data types can vary between structured and unstructured data. Since these tools can read a variety of data inputs from JSON, API, Excel, Text Files, CSV within one workbook companies are empowered to “never say no” to data, and visually explore trends that might have previously been ignored or inaccessible. The visualization tools go beyond the basics of Excel Charting features because they provide GUI tools to access large amounts of data in a consumable and reusable way. This concept of reusability is key, especially for large corporations that need to compare several facts against a similar measure. One example of this is through a parameter. These parameters allow for a mathematical “if statement” to be applied to calculated measures and provide the end user to easily interact with the data. Another feature that goes beyond basic Excel functionality is the “Story” or “Motion” Feature of Tableau. This feature allows for the user to create a basic animation highlighting a trend.


This is not to say that these functionalities do not exist or are possible within Excel. However, in Excel these functionalities are hidden among pivot tables or macros, and require an in-depth knowledge of excel development or VBA. Common pain points of Excel, such as merged cells or poorly formatted tables are resolved through built in Tableau functionalities such as the data interpreter. Modern day tools empower end users through easy to use GUI and drag and drop allowing for the creation of visualizations that can quickly provide real business value without in depth knowledge of data management.
